\chapter{Foreword}

Algorithms are at the heart of computer science. Effective algorithms
for concrete problems are always based on a goed choice of the
abstraction and a formal insight in that abstraction. Apparently, {\em
graphs} offer an often useful abstraction context, so we start this
course with an introduction to graph theory: basic concepts, a few
theorems, and some algorithms that are based on the theorems. Graphs
will be useful in the later chapters. After graph theory follow
chapters on {\em languages}: we build up a hierarchy of languages,
the necessary machinery to decide those languages, and the formalisms
to specify them. We pay particular attention to non-decidable
languages, because they define the limits of what can be achieved by
means of an algorithm. The course notes end with an introduction to
complexity theory: one of the central problems of computer science is
defined precisely, i.e. the question whether $\P$ equals
$\NP$. Besides time complexity, we also discuss space complexity.


This text is a translation of the course notes for {\em Fundamenten
voor de Computerwetenschappen}, and it contains pieces of course
notes from other courses, in particular
\begin{verse}
* {\em Fundamenten voor de Informatica} 1$^{ste}$ Bachelor
Informatica, written with my colleague K. De Kimpe in 1997,

* {\em Automaten en Berekenbaarheid} 3$^{de}$ Bachelor Informatica,
written in 2004.
\end{verse}
This explains the non-uniform style.

Sources and extra material are mentioned at the end of a chapter, the
end of a subject, or the end of the course notes. On purpose, there
are no exercises in this text, but often, the student is invited to
do certain things themselves.

